docs/source/java/driver_manager.rst, before:

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

==============
Driver Manager
==============

Installation
============

To include the ADBC Driver Manager in your Maven project, add the following dependency:

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
      <groupId>org.apache.arrow.adbc</groupId>
      <artifactId>adbc-driver-manager</artifactId>
      <version>${adbc.version}</version>
   </dependency>

API Reference
=============

See the `API reference <./api/org/apache/arrow/adbc/drivermanager/package-summary.html>`_.

Commit message:

docs: rework driver manager references across docs (#3388)
This PR does a somewhat comprehensive rework of how we refer to the
driver manager and makes a few tweaks in various places in the docs.

It started with the Python page for the driver manager but also removes
redundant descriptions of the driver managers in other languages in
favor of a common definition in the glossary. It extends the Python
driver manager docs a bit and also adds "driver manifest" as a term in
the glossary.

Resolves #3363
Resolves #3385

---------

Co-authored-by: Ian Cook <ianmcook@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: David Li <li.davidm96@gmail.com>

docs/source/java/driver_manager.rst, after:

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

==============
Driver Manager
==============

This document describes the installation of the Java :term:`driver manager`.

Installation
============

To include the ADBC Driver Manager in your Maven project, add the following dependency:

.. code-block:: xml

   <dependency>
      <groupId>org.apache.arrow.adbc</groupId>
      <artifactId>adbc-driver-manager</artifactId>
      <version>${adbc.version}</version>
   </dependency>

API Reference
=============

See the `API reference <./api/org/apache/arrow/adbc/drivermanager/package-summary.html>`_.
