CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Contributing to ADBC

## Reporting Issues

Please file issues on the GitHub issue tracker:
https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues

## Building

### Environment Setup

Some dependencies are required to build and test the various ADBC packages.

For C/C++, you will most likely want a [Conda][conda] installation,
with [Miniforge][miniforge] being the most convenient distribution.
If you have Miniforge installed, you can set up a development
environment as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
```

Also you can add dependencies to an existing environment as follows:

```shell
$ mamba activate adbc
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt
```

(For other Conda distributions, you will likely need `create ... -c
conda-forge --file ...`).

There are additional environment definitions for development on Python
and GLib/Ruby packages.

Conda is not required; you may also use a package manager like Nix or
Homebrew, the system package manager, etc. so long as you configure
CMake or other build tool appropriately.  However, we primarily
develop and support Conda users.

[conda]: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/
[miniforge]: https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html

### Running Integration Tests

Many of the test suites need to run against external services.  For example,
the PostgreSQL driver needs to test against a running database!  This can be
done by setting environment variables to tell tests where the services they
need can be located.

To standardize the configuration of these services, we use a Docker Compose
file and a dotenv file.  Services can be started with Docker Compose:

```shell
$ docker compose up --detach --wait postgres-test
```

Then, source the .env file at the root of the repo to set the environment
variables before running tests:

```shell
$ source .env
```

### C/C++

All libraries here contained within one CMake project. To build any
library, pass the `-DADBC_COMPONENT=ON` flag to your cmake invocation,
replacing `_COMPONENT` with the name of the library/libraries.

_Note:_ unlike the Arrow C++ build system, the CMake projects will
**not** automatically download and build dependencies—you should
configure CMake appropriately to find dependencies in system or
package manager locations, if you are not using something like Conda.

You can use CMake presets to build and test:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
$ cmake ../c --preset debug
$ cmake --build .
# ctest reads presets from PWD
$ pushd ../c
$ ctest --preset debug --test-dir ../build
```

You can also manually configure CMake.  For example, the driver manager and
postgres driver may be built together as follows:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
$ export CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON
$ cmake ../c -DADBC_DRIVER_POSTGRESQL=ON -DADBC_DRIVER_MANAGER=ON
$ make -j
```

[`export CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON`][cmake-compile-commands] is
not required, but is useful if you are using Visual Studio Code,
Emacs, or another editor that integrates with a C/C++ language server.

For information on what each library can do and their dependencies,
see their individual READMEs.

To specify where dependencies are to the build, use standard CMake
options such as [`CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`][cmake-prefix-path].

Some build options are supported:

- `ADBC_BUILD_SHARED`, `ADBC_BUILD_STATIC`: toggle building the
  shared/static libraries.
- `ADBC_BUILD_TESTS`: build the unit tests (requires googletest/gmock).
- `ADBC_INSTALL_NAME_RPATH`: set `install_name` to `@rpath` on MacOS.
  Usually it is more convenient to explicitly set this to `OFF` for
  development.

All libraries use the same build options to enable tests.
For example, to build and run tests for the SQLite3 driver:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
# You may need to set -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH such that googletest can be found
$ cmake ../c -DADBC_BUILD_TESTS=ON -DADBC_DRIVER_SQLITE=ON
$ make -j
$ ctest
```

Tests use [Googletest][gtest].  Some libraries may have additional
test-time dependencies.  For instance, the PostgreSQL and Flight SQL
drivers require servers to test against.  See their individual READMEs
for details.

[cmake-compile-commands]: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS.html
[cmake-prefix-path]: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH.html
[gtest]: https://github.com/google/googletest/

### C/C++ with Meson

While CMake is the officially supported build generator, there is limited,
experimental support for the Meson build system. Meson offers arguably better
dependency management than CMake, with a syntax that Python developers may
find more readable.

To use Meson, start at the c directory and run:

```shell
$ meson setup build
```

For a full list of options, ``meson configure`` will bring up a pager
with sections that you can navigate. The "Project Options" section in particular
will show you what ADBC has to offer, and each option can be provided using
the form ``-D_option_:_value_``. For example, to build the a debug version of
the SQLite3 driver along with tests, you would run:

```shell
$ meson configure -Dbuildtype=debug -Dsqlite=enabled -Dtests=enabled build
```

With the options set, you can then compile the project. For most dependencies,
Meson will try to find them on your system and fall back to downloading a copy
from its WrapDB for you:

```shell
$ meson compile -C build
```

To run the test suite, simply run:

```shell
$ meson test -C build
```

### C#/.NET

Make sure [.NET Core is installed](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download).

```shell
$ pushd csharp
$ dotnet build
```

### Documentation

The documentation uses the [Sphinx][sphinx] documentation generator.

A list of dependencies for Conda (conda-forge) is included, and can be
used as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_docs.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
# Mermaid must be installed separately
# While "global", it will end up in your Conda environment
$ npm install -g @mermaid-js/mermaid-cli
```

To build the HTML documentation:

```shell
$ pushd docs
$ make html
```

The output can be found in `build/`.  This does not generate API references
and results in some warnings, but it is not a problem if you're not working
with the API documentation.

Some documentations are maintained as [Mermaid][mermaid] diagrams, which must
be rendered and checked in.  This can be done as follows:

```shell
$ pushd docs
$ make -f mermaid.makefile -j all
# Check in the updated files
```

[mermaid]: https://mermaid.js.org/
[sphinx]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/

#### Building more complete documentation

You can remove the warnings of `make html` and generate the Python API
reference as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc \
  --file ci/conda_env_docs.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_python.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_java.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
$ env ADBC_USE_ASAN=0 ADBC_USE_UBSAN=0 ./ci/scripts/python_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
$ pushd docs
$ make html
```

For a more complete build, you can use the following script:

```shell
$ ./ci/scripts/docs_build.sh "$(pwd)"
```

This generates all available API references, and also runs doctests.

To generate the R API reference, you need to run the following additionally:

```shell
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_r.txt
$ ./ci/scripts/r_build.sh $(pwd)
```

### GLib

The GLib bindings use the [Meson][meson] build system.

A build of the [driver manager](./c/driver_manager/README.md) is
required.  For example, if the libraries are installed to
`$HOME/local`:

```shell
$ meson setup \
    --pkg-config-path=$HOME/local/lib/pkgconfig \
    --prefix=$HOME/local \
    build/glib \
    glib
$ meson install -C build/glib
```

A list of dependencies for Conda (conda-forge) is included, and can be
used as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_glib.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
```


[meson]: https://mesonbuild.com/

### Go

Go libraries are a standard Go project.

```shell
$ pushd go/adbc
$ go build -v ./...
$ go test -v ./...
```

### Java

The Java components are a standard Maven project.

```shell
$ pushd java/
# Build and run tests
$ mvn clean install
```

CI also builds the project with [Checker Framework][checker-framework] and
[ErrorProne][error-prone] enabled.  These projects require additional
configuration.  First, create a file `java/.mvn/jvm.config` containing this:

```
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.api=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.file=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.main=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.model=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.parser=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.processing=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.tree=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.util=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-opens jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.code=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-opens jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.comp=ALL-UNNAMED
```

This is required so that the above static analysis tools can continue to
access necessary Java compiler internals to do their job.

Then, build with the `errorprone` Maven profile enabled:

```
mvn install -Perrorprone
```

[checker-framework]: https://checkerframework.org/
[errorprone]: https://errorprone.info/

#### JNI

To build the JNI bridge, the native components must be built.

```
# Build the driver manager
export ADBC_BUILD_STATIC=ON
export ADBC_BUILD_TESTS=OFF
export ADBC_USE_ASAN=OFF
export ADBC_USE_UBSAN=OFF
export BUILD_ALL=OFF
export BUILD_DRIVER_MANAGER=ON
export BUILD_DRIVER_SQLITE=ON
./ci/scripts/cpp_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build $(pwd)/local

# Build the JNI libraries
./ci/scripts/java_jni_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/java/build $(pwd)/local
```

Now build the Java code with the `jni` Maven profile enabled.  To run tests,
the SQLite driver must also be present in (DY)LD_LIBRARY_PATH.

```
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$(pwd)/local/lib
pushd java
mvn install -Pjni
popd
```

This will build a JAR with native libraries for a single platform.  If the
native libraries are built for multiple platforms, they can all be copied to
appropriate paths in the resources directory to build a single JAR that works
across multiple platforms.

You can also build and test in IntelliJ; simply edit the run/test
configuration to add `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` to the environment.

### Python

Python libraries are managed with [setuptools][setuptools].  See
individual READMEs for additional dependencies.  In general, that
means all projects can be built as follows:

```shell
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_python.txt
$ pushd python/adbc_driver_manager
$ pip install -e .
```

Tests use [pytest][pytest].  Some libraries may have additional
test-time dependencies.  See their individual READMEs for details.

```shell
# Install dependencies
$ pip install -e .[test]

# Run tests
$ pytest -vvx
```

Type checking is done with [pyright][pyright].  There is a script to
run the type checker:

```shell
# Build native libraries first
$ env ADBC_USE_ASAN=0 ADBC_USE_UBSAN=0 ./ci/scripts/cpp_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
# Install Python packages
$ ./ci/scripts/python_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
# Run type checker
$ ./ci/scripts/python_typecheck.sh $(pwd)
```

[pyright]: https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/
[pytest]: https://docs.pytest.org/
[setuptools]: https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html

### Ruby

The Ruby libraries are bindings around the GLib libraries.

### Rust

The Rust components are a standard Rust project.

```shell
$ pushd rust
# Build and run tests
$ cargo test
```

## Opening a Pull Request

Before opening a pull request:

1. Please check if there is a corresponding issue (_and if not, please make one_).
2. Assign the issue to yourself by commenting "take" in the issue.
   (_Here's an [example](https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues/1505#issuecomment-1920134722)._)
3. At the bottom of the PR description, add `Closes #NNNN` where `NNNN` is the
   issue number, so that the issue gets linked to your PR properly. ("Fixes"
   and other keywords that GitHub recognizes are also OK, of course.)

Before opening a pull request, please run the static checks, which are
enforced via [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/).  This will run
linters, formatters, and other analysis.  For example:

```shell
# Install pre-commit
$ pip install pre-commit
# or alternatively
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_dev.txt
# Set up hooks
$ pre-commit install
# Run manually
$ pre-commit run
check xml.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
check yaml................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
fix end of files..........................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Mixed line endings (LF)...................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Mixed line endings (CRLF).................................................(no files to check)Skipped
trim trailing whitespace..................................................(no files to check)Skipped
clang-format..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cmake-format..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cpplint...................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
golangci-lint.............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Go Formatter..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Google (or Palantir) Java Formatter.......................................(no files to check)Skipped
black.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
flake8....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
isort.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cython-lint...............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Vala-Lint.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
meson.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Check for unapproved licenses.............................................(no files to check)Skipped
Ensure CGO adbc.h is syncd................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Ensure GitHub Actions and pre-commit hooks are pinned to a specific SHA...(no files to check)Skipped
rustfmt...................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
codespell.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
# Hooks automatically run on commit
$ git commit
```

When committing, please follow [Conventional
Commits][conventional-commits].  This helps maintain semantic
versioning of components.

Please use the following commit types: `build`, `chore`, `ci`, `docs`,
`feat`, `fix`, `perf`, `refactor`, `revert`, `style`, `test`.

Please use the following scopes:

- `c/driver/postgresql`, `java/driver-manager`, …: for a component and
  all its bindings.  For example, `c/driver-manager` covers the C/C++
  driver manager and its GLib and Python bindings, while
  `java/driver/flight-sql` covers only the Flight SQL driver for Java.
  (The scope names are derived from the filesystem paths.)
- `c/format`, `go/format`, `java/format`: for the core API definitions
  (adbc.h for C/C++, adbc.go for Go, adbc-core for Java).

For example:

```
feat(c/driver/postgresql): implement prepared statements

ci(go/adbc/drivermgr): pass through DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH in tests

fix(java/driver/jdbc): adjust SQL type mapping for JDBC driver
```

## Re-generating 3rd Party Licenses

In order to collect the licenses for our Go-dependencies we leverage the
tool `github.com/google/go-licenses`. We have a template containing the
non-go licenses, and then you can install `go-licenses` with:

```shell
$ go install github.com/google/go-licenses@latest
```

You can generate the LICENSE.txt with the following command:

```shell
$ pushd go/adbc && go-licenses report ./... \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v11 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v12 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v13 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v14 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v15 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v16 \
  --template ../../license.tpl > ../../LICENSE.txt 2> /dev/null
```

You will have to manually fix up the license, since some packages do not
fill out their metadata correctly and things like READMEs may end up in
the license.

[conventional-commits]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/

Commit message:

fix(java/driver/jni): update AdbcDriverFactory metadata (#3348)

CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Contributing to ADBC

## Reporting Issues

Please file issues on the GitHub issue tracker:
https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues

## Building

### Environment Setup

Some dependencies are required to build and test the various ADBC packages.

For C/C++, you will most likely want a [Conda][conda] installation,
with [Miniforge][miniforge] being the most convenient distribution.
If you have Miniforge installed, you can set up a development
environment as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
```

Also you can add dependencies to an existing environment as follows:

```shell
$ mamba activate adbc
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt
```

(For other Conda distributions, you will likely need `create ... -c
conda-forge --file ...`).

There are additional environment definitions for development on Python
and GLib/Ruby packages.

Conda is not required; you may also use a package manager like Nix or
Homebrew, the system package manager, etc. so long as you configure
CMake or other build tool appropriately.  However, we primarily
develop and support Conda users.

[conda]: https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/
[miniforge]: https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/mamba-installation.html

### Running Integration Tests

Many of the test suites need to run against external services.  For example,
the PostgreSQL driver needs to test against a running database!  This can be
done by setting environment variables to tell tests where the services they
need can be located.

To standardize the configuration of these services, we use a Docker Compose
file and a dotenv file.  Services can be started with Docker Compose:

```shell
$ docker compose up --detach --wait postgres-test
```

Then, source the .env file at the root of the repo to set the environment
variables before running tests:

```shell
$ source .env
```

### C/C++

All libraries here contained within one CMake project. To build any
library, pass the `-DADBC_COMPONENT=ON` flag to your cmake invocation,
replacing `_COMPONENT` with the name of the library/libraries.

_Note:_ unlike the Arrow C++ build system, the CMake projects will
**not** automatically download and build dependencies—you should
configure CMake appropriately to find dependencies in system or
package manager locations, if you are not using something like Conda.

You can use CMake presets to build and test:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
$ cmake ../c --preset debug
$ cmake --build .
# ctest reads presets from PWD
$ pushd ../c
$ ctest --preset debug --test-dir ../build
```

You can also manually configure CMake.  For example, the driver manager and
postgres driver may be built together as follows:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
$ export CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON
$ cmake ../c -DADBC_DRIVER_POSTGRESQL=ON -DADBC_DRIVER_MANAGER=ON
$ make -j
```

[`export CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS=ON`][cmake-compile-commands] is
not required, but is useful if you are using Visual Studio Code,
Emacs, or another editor that integrates with a C/C++ language server.

For information on what each library can do and their dependencies,
see their individual READMEs.

To specify where dependencies are to the build, use standard CMake
options such as [`CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`][cmake-prefix-path].

Some build options are supported:

- `ADBC_BUILD_SHARED`, `ADBC_BUILD_STATIC`: toggle building the
  shared/static libraries.
- `ADBC_BUILD_TESTS`: build the unit tests (requires googletest/gmock).
- `ADBC_INSTALL_NAME_RPATH`: set `install_name` to `@rpath` on MacOS.
  Usually it is more convenient to explicitly set this to `OFF` for
  development.

All libraries use the same build options to enable tests.
For example, to build and run tests for the SQLite3 driver:

```shell
$ mkdir build
$ pushd build
# You may need to set -DCMAKE_PREFIX_PATH such that googletest can be found
$ cmake ../c -DADBC_BUILD_TESTS=ON -DADBC_DRIVER_SQLITE=ON
$ make -j
$ ctest
```

Tests use [Googletest][gtest].  Some libraries may have additional
test-time dependencies.  For instance, the PostgreSQL and Flight SQL
drivers require servers to test against.  See their individual READMEs
for details.

[cmake-compile-commands]: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_EXPORT_COMPILE_COMMANDS.html
[cmake-prefix-path]: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/variable/CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH.html
[gtest]: https://github.com/google/googletest/

### C/C++ with Meson

While CMake is the officially supported build generator, there is limited,
experimental support for the Meson build system. Meson offers arguably better
dependency management than CMake, with a syntax that Python developers may
find more readable.

To use Meson, start at the c directory and run:

```shell
$ meson setup build
```

For a full list of options, ``meson configure`` will bring up a pager
with sections that you can navigate. The "Project Options" section in particular
will show you what ADBC has to offer, and each option can be provided using
the form ``-D_option_:_value_``. For example, to build the a debug version of
the SQLite3 driver along with tests, you would run:

```shell
$ meson configure -Dbuildtype=debug -Dsqlite=enabled -Dtests=enabled build
```

With the options set, you can then compile the project. For most dependencies,
Meson will try to find them on your system and fall back to downloading a copy
from its WrapDB for you:

```shell
$ meson compile -C build
```

To run the test suite, simply run:

```shell
$ meson test -C build
```

### C#/.NET

Make sure [.NET Core is installed](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download).

```shell
$ pushd csharp
$ dotnet build
```

### Documentation

The documentation uses the [Sphinx][sphinx] documentation generator.

A list of dependencies for Conda (conda-forge) is included, and can be
used as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_docs.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
# Mermaid must be installed separately
# While "global", it will end up in your Conda environment
$ npm install -g @mermaid-js/mermaid-cli
```

To build the HTML documentation:

```shell
$ pushd docs
$ make html
```

The output can be found in `build/`.  This does not generate API references
and results in some warnings, but it is not a problem if you're not working
with the API documentation.

Some documentations are maintained as [Mermaid][mermaid] diagrams, which must
be rendered and checked in.  This can be done as follows:

```shell
$ pushd docs
$ make -f mermaid.makefile -j all
# Check in the updated files
```

[mermaid]: https://mermaid.js.org/
[sphinx]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/

#### Building more complete documentation

You can remove the warnings of `make html` and generate the Python API
reference as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc \
  --file ci/conda_env_docs.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_cpp.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_python.txt \
  --file ci/conda_env_java.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
$ env ADBC_USE_ASAN=0 ADBC_USE_UBSAN=0 ./ci/scripts/python_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
$ pushd docs
$ make html
```

For a more complete build, you can use the following script:

```shell
$ ./ci/scripts/docs_build.sh "$(pwd)"
```

This generates all available API references, and also runs doctests.

To generate the R API reference, you need to run the following additionally:

```shell
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_r.txt
$ ./ci/scripts/r_build.sh $(pwd)
```

### GLib

The GLib bindings use the [Meson][meson] build system.

A build of the [driver manager](./c/driver_manager/README.md) is
required.  For example, if the libraries are installed to
`$HOME/local`:

```shell
$ meson setup \
    --pkg-config-path=$HOME/local/lib/pkgconfig \
    --prefix=$HOME/local \
    build/glib \
    glib
$ meson install -C build/glib
```

A list of dependencies for Conda (conda-forge) is included, and can be
used as follows:

```shell
$ mamba create -n adbc --file ci/conda_env_glib.txt
$ mamba activate adbc
```


[meson]: https://mesonbuild.com/

### Go

Go libraries are a standard Go project.

```shell
$ pushd go/adbc
$ go build -v ./...
$ go test -v ./...
```

### Java

The Java components are a standard Maven project.

```shell
$ pushd java/
# Build and run tests
$ mvn clean install
```

CI also builds the project with [Checker Framework][checker-framework] and
[ErrorProne][error-prone] enabled.  These projects require additional
configuration.  First, create a file `java/.mvn/jvm.config` containing this:

```
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.api=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.file=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.main=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.model=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.parser=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.processing=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.tree=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-exports jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.util=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-opens jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.code=ALL-UNNAMED
--add-opens jdk.compiler/com.sun.tools.javac.comp=ALL-UNNAMED
```

This is required so that the above static analysis tools can continue to
access necessary Java compiler internals to do their job.

Then, build with the `errorprone` Maven profile enabled:

```
mvn install -Perrorprone
```

[checker-framework]: https://checkerframework.org/
[errorprone]: https://errorprone.info/

#### JNI

To build the JNI bridge, the native components must be built.

```
# Build the driver manager
export ADBC_BUILD_STATIC=ON
export ADBC_BUILD_TESTS=OFF
export ADBC_USE_ASAN=OFF
export ADBC_USE_UBSAN=OFF
export BUILD_ALL=OFF
export BUILD_DRIVER_MANAGER=ON
export BUILD_DRIVER_SQLITE=ON
./ci/scripts/cpp_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build $(pwd)/local

# Ensure JAVA_HOME is set.
# If it's not set, you can find it like so:
# java -XshowSettings:properties -version 2>&1 >/dev/null | grep java.home

# Build the JNI libraries
./ci/scripts/java_jni_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/java/build $(pwd)/local
```

Now build the Java code with the `jni` Maven profile enabled.  To run tests,
the SQLite driver must also be present in (DY)LD_LIBRARY_PATH.

```
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$(pwd)/local/lib
pushd java
mvn install -Pjni
popd
```

This will build a JAR with native libraries for a single platform.  If the
native libraries are built for multiple platforms, they can all be copied to
appropriate paths in the resources directory to build a single JAR that works
across multiple platforms.

You can also build and test in IntelliJ; simply edit the run/test
configuration to add `LD_LIBRARY_PATH` to the environment.

### Python

Python libraries are managed with [setuptools][setuptools].  See
individual READMEs for additional dependencies.  In general, that
means all projects can be built as follows:

```shell
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_python.txt
$ pushd python/adbc_driver_manager
$ pip install -e .
```

Tests use [pytest][pytest].  Some libraries may have additional
test-time dependencies.  See their individual READMEs for details.

```shell
# Install dependencies
$ pip install -e .[test]

# Run tests
$ pytest -vvx
```

Type checking is done with [pyright][pyright].  There is a script to
run the type checker:

```shell
# Build native libraries first
$ env ADBC_USE_ASAN=0 ADBC_USE_UBSAN=0 ./ci/scripts/cpp_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
# Install Python packages
$ ./ci/scripts/python_build.sh $(pwd) $(pwd)/build
# Run type checker
$ ./ci/scripts/python_typecheck.sh $(pwd)
```

[pyright]: https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/
[pytest]: https://docs.pytest.org/
[setuptools]: https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html

### Ruby

The Ruby libraries are bindings around the GLib libraries.

### Rust

The Rust components are a standard Rust project.

```shell
$ pushd rust
# Build and run tests
$ cargo test
```

## Opening a Pull Request

Before opening a pull request:

1. Please check if there is a corresponding issue (_and if not, please make one_).
2. Assign the issue to yourself by commenting "take" in the issue.
   (_Here's an [example](https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/issues/1505#issuecomment-1920134722)._)
3. At the bottom of the PR description, add `Closes #NNNN` where `NNNN` is the
   issue number, so that the issue gets linked to your PR properly. ("Fixes"
   and other keywords that GitHub recognizes are also OK, of course.)

Before opening a pull request, please run the static checks, which are
enforced via [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com/).  This will run
linters, formatters, and other analysis.  For example:

```shell
# Install pre-commit
$ pip install pre-commit
# or alternatively
$ mamba install --file ci/conda_env_dev.txt
# Set up hooks
$ pre-commit install
# Run manually
$ pre-commit run
check xml.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
check yaml................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
fix end of files..........................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Mixed line endings (LF)...................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Mixed line endings (CRLF).................................................(no files to check)Skipped
trim trailing whitespace..................................................(no files to check)Skipped
clang-format..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cmake-format..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cpplint...................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
golangci-lint.............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Go Formatter..............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Google (or Palantir) Java Formatter.......................................(no files to check)Skipped
black.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
flake8....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
isort.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
cython-lint...............................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Vala-Lint.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
meson.....................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Check for unapproved licenses.............................................(no files to check)Skipped
Ensure CGO adbc.h is syncd................................................(no files to check)Skipped
Ensure GitHub Actions and pre-commit hooks are pinned to a specific SHA...(no files to check)Skipped
rustfmt...................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
codespell.................................................................(no files to check)Skipped
# Hooks automatically run on commit
$ git commit
```

When committing, please follow [Conventional
Commits][conventional-commits].  This helps maintain semantic
versioning of components.

Please use the following commit types: `build`, `chore`, `ci`, `docs`,
`feat`, `fix`, `perf`, `refactor`, `revert`, `style`, `test`.

Please use the following scopes:

- `c/driver/postgresql`, `java/driver-manager`, …: for a component and
  all its bindings.  For example, `c/driver-manager` covers the C/C++
  driver manager and its GLib and Python bindings, while
  `java/driver/flight-sql` covers only the Flight SQL driver for Java.
  (The scope names are derived from the filesystem paths.)
- `c/format`, `go/format`, `java/format`: for the core API definitions
  (adbc.h for C/C++, adbc.go for Go, adbc-core for Java).

For example:

```
feat(c/driver/postgresql): implement prepared statements

ci(go/adbc/drivermgr): pass through DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH in tests

fix(java/driver/jdbc): adjust SQL type mapping for JDBC driver
```

## Re-generating 3rd Party Licenses

In order to collect the licenses for our Go-dependencies we leverage the
tool `github.com/google/go-licenses`. We have a template containing the
non-go licenses, and then you can install `go-licenses` with:

```shell
$ go install github.com/google/go-licenses@latest
```

You can generate the LICENSE.txt with the following command:

```shell
$ pushd go/adbc && go-licenses report ./... \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v11 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v12 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v13 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v14 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v15 \
  --ignore github.com/apache/arrow/go/v16 \
  --template ../../license.tpl > ../../LICENSE.txt 2> /dev/null
```

You will have to manually fix up the license, since some packages do not
fill out their metadata correctly and things like READMEs may end up in
the license.

[conventional-commits]: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/
