csharp/src/Drivers/DuckDB/README.md, before:

# Apache Arrow ADBC Driver for DuckDB

This is an ADBC (Arrow Database Connectivity) driver for DuckDB, built on top of [DuckDB.NET](https://github.com/Giorgi/DuckDB.NET).

## Features

- Full ADBC API compliance
- Efficient data conversion from DuckDB to Arrow format
- Support for all basic DuckDB data types
- Metadata operations (GetObjects, GetTableSchema, etc.)
- Parameterized queries
- Transaction support

## Installation

```bash
dotnet add package Apache.Arrow.Adbc.Drivers.DuckDB
```

## Usage

```csharp
using Apache.Arrow.Adbc.Drivers.DuckDB;

// Create a driver
var driver = new DuckDBDriver();

// Open a database (in-memory)
var database = driver.Open(new Dictionary<string, string>
{
    { DuckDBParameters.DataSource, ":memory:" }
});

// Create a connection
using var connection = database.Connect(null);

// Execute a query
using var statement = connection.CreateStatement();
statement.SqlQuery = "SELECT 1 as id, 'test' as name";

var result = await statement.ExecuteQueryAsync();
await using var stream = result.Stream;

// Read results as Arrow RecordBatches
while (await stream.ReadNextRecordBatchAsync() is RecordBatch batch)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Got batch with {batch.Length} rows");
}
```

## Connection Parameters

- `adbc.duckdb.data_source` or `uri` - Path to DuckDB file or `:memory:` for in-memory database
- `adbc.duckdb.batch_size` - Number of rows per RecordBatch (default: 1024)
- `adbc.duckdb.use_chunk_conversion` - Use chunk-based conversion (default: true)
- `adbc.duckdb.enable_memory_pooling` - Enable memory pooling (default: true)

## Data Type Mappings

| DuckDB Type | Arrow Type |
|-------------|------------|
| BOOLEAN | Bool |
| TINYINT | Int8 |
| SMALLINT | Int16 |
| INTEGER | Int32 |
| BIGINT | Int64 |
| UTINYINT | UInt8 |
| USMALLINT | UInt16 |
| UINTEGER | UInt32 |
| UBIGINT | UInt64 |
| FLOAT | Float32 |
| DOUBLE | Float64 |
| DECIMAL | Decimal128 |
| VARCHAR | Utf8 |
| BLOB | Binary |
| DATE | Date32 |
| TIME | Time64 |
| TIMESTAMP | Timestamp |
| UUID | FixedSizeBinary(16) |

## Known Limitations

- No support for bulk parameter binding (Bind/BindStream)
- Limited support for complex nested types
- No direct Arrow export (DuckDB's Arrow C API is deprecated)

## Development

The driver converts DuckDB query results to Arrow format on the client side, as DuckDB's native Arrow C API has been deprecated in favor of the Arrow IPC format.

Commit message:

Add experimental Arrow IPC support for DuckDB ADBC driver
Implemented support for DuckDB's new Arrow IPC format using the nanoarrow extension.
This provides a more performant path for data transfer when enabled.

Features:
- Added DuckDBArrowIpcStream that uses to_arrow_ipc() function
- Added UseArrowIpc option (default: false due to type mapping differences)
- Automatic fallback to row-by-row conversion if IPC is unavailable
- Tests for both IPC and fallback modes

Note: Arrow IPC is currently experimental and disabled by default because:
- Type mapping differences between IPC and row-by-row modes (e.g., Decimal64 vs Decimal128)
- Requires nanoarrow extension to be installed
- Some edge cases with null handling need further investigation

Future work:
- Add native Arrow C API support to DuckDB.NET for zero-copy transfers
- Resolve type mapping differences for full compatibility
- Enable by default once stable

csharp/src/Drivers/DuckDB/README.md, after:

# Apache Arrow ADBC Driver for DuckDB

This is an ADBC (Arrow Database Connectivity) driver for DuckDB, built on top of [DuckDB.NET](https://github.com/Giorgi/DuckDB.NET).

## Features

- Full ADBC API compliance
- Efficient data conversion from DuckDB to Arrow format
- Support for all basic DuckDB data types
- Metadata operations (GetObjects, GetTableSchema, etc.)
- Parameterized queries
- Transaction support

## Installation

```bash
dotnet add package Apache.Arrow.Adbc.Drivers.DuckDB
```

## Usage

```csharp
using Apache.Arrow.Adbc.Drivers.DuckDB;

// Create a driver
var driver = new DuckDBDriver();

// Open a database (in-memory)
var database = driver.Open(new Dictionary<string, string>
{
    { DuckDBParameters.DataSource, ":memory:" }
});

// Create a connection
using var connection = database.Connect(null);

// Execute a query
using var statement = connection.CreateStatement();
statement.SqlQuery = "SELECT 1 as id, 'test' as name";

var result = await statement.ExecuteQueryAsync();
await using var stream = result.Stream;

// Read results as Arrow RecordBatches
while (await stream.ReadNextRecordBatchAsync() is RecordBatch batch)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Got batch with {batch.Length} rows");
}
```

## Connection Parameters

- `adbc.duckdb.data_source` or `uri` - Path to DuckDB file or `:memory:` for in-memory database
- `adbc.duckdb.batch_size` - Number of rows per RecordBatch (default: 1024)
- `adbc.duckdb.use_chunk_conversion` - Use chunk-based conversion (default: true)
- `adbc.duckdb.enable_memory_pooling` - Enable memory pooling (default: true)

## Data Type Mappings

| DuckDB Type | Arrow Type |
|-------------|------------|
| BOOLEAN | Bool |
| TINYINT | Int8 |
| SMALLINT | Int16 |
| INTEGER | Int32 |
| BIGINT | Int64 |
| UTINYINT | UInt8 |
| USMALLINT | UInt16 |
| UINTEGER | UInt32 |
| UBIGINT | UInt64 |
| FLOAT | Float32 |
| DOUBLE | Float64 |
| DECIMAL | Decimal128 |
| VARCHAR | Utf8 |
| BLOB | Binary |
| DATE | Date32 |
| TIME | Time64 |
| TIMESTAMP | Timestamp |
| UUID | FixedSizeBinary(16) |

## Performance Optimization

### Arrow IPC Support

The driver supports DuckDB's new Arrow IPC format for improved performance. This feature requires the `nanoarrow` extension:

```csharp
// Install the extension (one-time setup)
using var cmd = connection.CreateCommand();
cmd.CommandText = "INSTALL nanoarrow FROM community";
cmd.ExecuteNonQuery();

// Enable Arrow IPC (disabled by default due to type mapping differences)
statement.SetOption("adbc.duckdb.use_arrow_ipc", "true");
```

When Arrow IPC is enabled, query results are serialized using DuckDB's native Arrow IPC support, which can be more efficient than row-by-row conversion.

## Known Limitations

- Limited support for bulk parameter binding (only RecordBatch binding is supported)
- Limited support for complex nested types
- Arrow IPC requires the nanoarrow extension to be installed

## Development

The driver supports two modes of operation:
1. **Arrow IPC mode** (default) - Uses DuckDB's `to_arrow_ipc()` function for efficient data transfer when the nanoarrow extension is available
2. **Row-by-row mode** (fallback) - Converts DuckDB query results to Arrow format on the client side

The driver automatically falls back to row-by-row conversion if the Arrow IPC extension is not available.
