docs/source/driver/installation.rst, before:

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

============
Installation
============

.. note::

   See individual driver pages in the sidebar for specific installation instructions.

Source
======

The latest source release can be downloaded from the `Apache mirrors`_.
Compilation instructions can be found in `CONTRIBUTING.md`_.

.. _Apache mirrors: https://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.lua/arrow/
.. _CONTRIBUTING.md: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md

C/C++
=====

Install the appropriate driver package.  You can use conda-forge_, ``apt`` or ``dnf``.

conda-forge:

- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-sqlite``

You can use ``apt`` on the following platforms:

- Debian GNU/Linux bookworm
- Ubuntu 22.04

Prepare the Apache Arrow APT repository:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install -y -V ca-certificates lsb-release wget
   sudo wget https://apache.jfrog.io/artifactory/arrow/$(lsb_release --id --short | tr 'A-Z' 'a-z')/apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   sudo apt install -y -V ./apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   rm ./apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   sudo apt update

Install:

- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-flightsql-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-postgresql-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-sqlite-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-snowflake-dev``

You can use ``dnf`` on the following platforms:

- AlmaLinux 8
- Oracle Linux 8
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8
- AlmaLinux 9
- Oracle Linux 9
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9

Prepare the Apache Arrow Yum repository:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo dnf install -y epel-release || sudo dnf install -y oracle-epel-release-el$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1) || sudo dnf install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1).noarch.rpm
   sudo dnf install -y https://apache.jfrog.io/artifactory/arrow/almalinux/$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)/apache-arrow-release-latest.rpm
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled epel || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled powertools || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled crb || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled ol$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)_codeready_builder || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled codeready-builder-for-rhel-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)-rhui-rpms || :
   sudo subscription-manager repos --enable codeready-builder-for-rhel-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)-$(arch)-rpms || :

Install:

- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-flightsql-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-postgresql-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-sqlite-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-snowflake-devel``

Then they can be used via CMake, e.g.:

.. code-block:: cmake

   find_package(AdbcDriverPostgreSQL)

   # ...

   target_link_libraries(myapp PRIVATE AdbcDriverPostgreSQL::adbc_driver_postgresql_shared)

.. _conda-forge: https://conda-forge.org/

Go
==

Add a dependency on the driver package, for example:

- ``go get -u github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc@latest``
- ``go get -u github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc/driver/flightsql@latest``

Java
====

Add a dependency on the driver package, for example:

- ``org.apache.arrow.adbc:adbc-driver-flight-sql``
- ``org.apache.arrow.adbc:adbc-driver-jdbc``

Python
======

Install the appropriate driver package.

.. note:: To use the DBAPI interface, ``pyarrow`` is also required.

For example, from PyPI:

- ``pip install adbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-snowflake``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-sqlite``

From conda-forge_:

- ``mamba install adbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-snowflake``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-sqlite``

R
=

Install the appropriate driver package from CRAN:

.. code-block:: r

   install.packages("adbcsqlite")
   install.packages("adbcpostgresql")
   install.packages("duckdb")

Drivers not yet available on CRAN can be installed from R-multiverse:

.. code-block:: r

   install.packages("adbcflightsql", repos = "https://community.r-multiverse.org")
   install.packages("adbcsnowflake", repos = "https://community.r-multiverse.org")

Ruby
====

Install the appropriate driver package for C/C++. You can use it from
Ruby.

Rust
====

Add a dependency on ``adbc_core`` and any driver packages
(e.g. ``adbc_datafusion``):

.. code-block:: shell

   cargo add adbc_core adbc_datafusion

Commit message:

docs: rework driver manager references across docs (#3388)
This PR does a somewhat comprehensive rework of how we refer to the
driver manager and makes a few tweaks in various places in the docs.

It started with the Python page for the driver manager but also removes
redundant descriptions of the driver managers in other languages in
favor of a common definition in the glossary. It extends the Python
driver manager docs a bit and also adds "driver manifest" as a term in
the glossary.

Resolves #3363
Resolves #3385

---------

Co-authored-by: Ian Cook <ianmcook@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: David Li <li.davidm96@gmail.com>

docs/source/driver/installation.rst, after:

.. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
.. or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
.. distributed with this work for additional information
.. regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
.. to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
.. "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
.. with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
.. software distributed under the License is distributed on an
.. "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
.. KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
.. specific language governing permissions and limitations
.. under the License.

============
Installation
============

.. note::

   See individual driver pages in the sidebar for specific installation instructions.

Source
======

The latest source release can be downloaded from the `Apache mirrors`_.
Compilation instructions can be found in `CONTRIBUTING.md`_.

.. _Apache mirrors: https://www.apache.org/dyn/closer.lua/arrow/
.. _CONTRIBUTING.md: https://github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md

C/C++
=====

Install the appropriate driver package.  You can use conda-forge_, ``apt`` or ``dnf``.

conda-forge:

- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``mamba install libadbc-driver-sqlite``

You can use ``apt`` on the following platforms:

- Debian GNU/Linux bookworm
- Ubuntu 22.04

Prepare the Apache Arrow APT repository:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install -y -V ca-certificates lsb-release wget
   sudo wget https://apache.jfrog.io/artifactory/arrow/$(lsb_release --id --short | tr 'A-Z' 'a-z')/apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   sudo apt install -y -V ./apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   rm ./apache-arrow-apt-source-latest-$(lsb_release --codename --short).deb
   sudo apt update

Install:

- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-flightsql-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-postgresql-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-sqlite-dev``
- ``sudo apt install libadbc-driver-snowflake-dev``

You can use ``dnf`` on the following platforms:

- AlmaLinux 8
- Oracle Linux 8
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8
- AlmaLinux 9
- Oracle Linux 9
- Red Hat Enterprise Linux 9

Prepare the Apache Arrow Yum repository:

.. code-block:: bash

   sudo dnf install -y epel-release || sudo dnf install -y oracle-epel-release-el$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1) || sudo dnf install -y https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/epel-release-latest-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1).noarch.rpm
   sudo dnf install -y https://apache.jfrog.io/artifactory/arrow/almalinux/$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)/apache-arrow-release-latest.rpm
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled epel || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled powertools || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled crb || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled ol$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)_codeready_builder || :
   sudo dnf config-manager --set-enabled codeready-builder-for-rhel-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)-rhui-rpms || :
   sudo subscription-manager repos --enable codeready-builder-for-rhel-$(cut -d: -f5 /etc/system-release-cpe | cut -d. -f1)-$(arch)-rpms || :

Install:

- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-flightsql-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-postgresql-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-sqlite-devel``
- ``sudo dnf install adbc-driver-snowflake-devel``

Then they can be used via CMake, e.g.:

.. code-block:: cmake

   find_package(AdbcDriverPostgreSQL)

   # ...

   target_link_libraries(myapp PRIVATE AdbcDriverPostgreSQL::adbc_driver_postgresql_shared)

.. _conda-forge: https://conda-forge.org/

Go
==

Add a dependency on the driver package, for example:

- ``go get -u github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc@latest``
- ``go get -u github.com/apache/arrow-adbc/go/adbc/driver/flightsql@latest``

Java
====

Add a dependency on the driver package, for example:

- ``org.apache.arrow.adbc:adbc-driver-flight-sql``
- ``org.apache.arrow.adbc:adbc-driver-jdbc``

Python
======

Install the appropriate driver package.

.. note:: To use the DBAPI interface, either ``pyarrow`` or ``polars`` must be installed.

For example, from PyPI:

- ``pip install adbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-snowflake``
- ``pip install adbc-driver-sqlite``

From conda-forge_:

- ``mamba install adbc-driver-flightsql``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-postgresql``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-snowflake``
- ``mamba install adbc-driver-sqlite``

R
=

Install the appropriate driver package from CRAN:

.. code-block:: r

   install.packages("adbcsqlite")
   install.packages("adbcpostgresql")
   install.packages("duckdb")

Drivers not yet available on CRAN can be installed from R-multiverse:

.. code-block:: r

   install.packages("adbcflightsql", repos = "https://community.r-multiverse.org")
   install.packages("adbcsnowflake", repos = "https://community.r-multiverse.org")

Ruby
====

Install the appropriate driver package for C/C++. You can use it from
Ruby.

Rust
====

Add a dependency on ``adbc_core`` and any driver packages
(e.g. ``adbc_datafusion``):

.. code-block:: shell

   cargo add adbc_core adbc_datafusion
